--- mhGAP_module_Assessment_Management_of_Conditions_Specifically_Related_to_Stress_WHO.pdf ---
mhGAP-IG
Assessment and Management of  
Conditions Specifically Related to Stress
mhGAP Intervention Guide Module
Mental Health Gap Action ProgrammeWHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Assessment and Management of Conditions Specifically Related 
to Stress: mhGAP Intervention Guide Module (version 1.0).
1.Stress disorders, Post-traumatic. 2.Stress disorders, Traumatic, 
Acute. 3.Mental health. 4.Adaptation, Psychological. 5.Relief work. 6.Guideline. I.World Health Organization. II.United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees.
ISBN 978 92 4 150593 2
(NLM classification: WM 172.5) 
© World Health Organization 2013
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization 
can be obtained from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 
3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int).  
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publica -
tions – whether for sale or for non-commercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press, at the above address  
(fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int). 
The designations employed and the presentation of the material  
in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area  
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers 
or boundaries. All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this 
publication. However, the published material is being distributed 
without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies 
with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization 
be liable for damages arising from its use. 
Suggested citation: 
World Health Organization and United Nations High Commis -
sioner for Refugees. Assessment and Management of Condi -
tions Specifically Related to Stress: mhGAP Intervention Guide 
Module (version 1.0). Geneva: WHO, 2013.
For more information, please contact:
Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse
World Health OrganizationAvenue Appia 20
CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Email: mhgap-info@who.int for feedback on this module  
or for requests of linked training materials.Website: www.who.int/mental_health/mhgap
wire possitionThe development of this module on Conditions Specifically 
Related to Stress was coordinated by Mark van Ommeren under 
the supervision of Shekhar Saxena.
The mhGAP team in the WHO Department of Mental Health and 
Substance Abuse in Geneva oversaw the development of this 
module. Team members are: Nico Clark, Tarun Dua, Alexandra 
Fleischmann, Shekhar Saxena, Chiara Servili, Yutaro Setoya, 
Mark van Ommeren and Taghi Yasamy. 
We thank Lynne Jones (FXB Center for Health and Human 
Rights, Harvard School of Public Health) for technical advice 
throughout the development of this module.Reviewers
Corrado Barbui (WHO Collaborating Centre for Research and 
Training in Mental Health, University of Verona); Thomas Barrett 
(University of Denver); Pierre Bastin (International Committee of 
the Red Cross); Ahmad Bawaneh (International Medical Corps); 
Myron Belfer (Harvard University); Jonathan Bisson (University of 
Wales); Chris Brewin (University College London); Judith Cohen 
(Drexel University College of Medicine); Katie Dawson (University 
of New South Wales); Joop de Jong (Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam); Pam Dix (Disaster Action); Chris Dowrick (University 
of Liverpool); Rabih El Chammay (Saint Joseph University Beirut); 
Julian Eaton (CBM); Carolina Echeverri (Colombia); Peter Hughes 
(National Health Service, UK); Lynne Jones (Harvard School of 
Public Health); Suhad Joudeh (Ministry of Health, Jordan); Ashraf 
Kagee (Stellenbosch University); Berit Kieselbach (WHO); Arwa 
Khashan (Ministry of Health, Jordan); Roos Korste (the 
Netherlands); Patti Levin (USA); Andreas Maercker (University of 
Zurich); Sarah Meyer (Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health); Laura Murray (Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health); Khalid Saeed (WHO); Pau Perez-Sales (Médicos 
del Mundo); Bhava Poudyal (Nepal); Cécile Rousseau (McGill 
University); Alison Schafer (World Vision International); Marian 
Schilperoord (UNHCR), Soraya Seedat (Stellenbosch University); 
Pratap Sharan (All India Institute of Medical Sciences); Renato 
Souza (University of Sao Paolo); Zachary Steel (University of New 
South Wales); Samvel Sukiasyan (Yerevan State University); 
Yuriko Suzuki  (National Institute of Mental Health, Japan); 
Wietse Tol (Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health), 
Graham Thornicroft (Institute of Psychiatry, UK); Peter 
Ventevogel (HealthNet TPO); Inka Weissbecker (International 
Medical Corps); Ann Willhoite (The Center for Victims of Torture) 
and Doug Zatzick (University of Washington).Funding  
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Guidelines Development Group
Jonathan Bisson (University of Wales), Judith Cohen (Drexel 
University College of Medicine), Joop de Jong (chair) (Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam), Zeinab Hijazi (International Medical 
Corps), Olayinka Omigbudon (University College Hospital, 
Ibadan), Soraya Seedat (Stellenbosch University), Derrick Silove 
(University of New South Wales), Renato Souza (International 
Committee of the Red Cross), Athula Sumathipala (Institute for 
Research and Development, Colombo), Lakshmi Vijaykumar 
(SNEHA, Chennai), Inka Weissbecker (International Medical 
Corps) and Doug Zatzick (University of Washington). 
 Acknowledgements
i
--- Guidelines_on_mental_health_at_work.pdf ---
WHO guidelines on  
mental health at work 
WHO guidelines on  
mental health at work

--- Mental_disorders_WHO.pdf ---
Mental disorders  
8 June 2022  
 
Key facts  
• 1 in every 8 people in the world live with a mental disorder  
• Mental disorders involve significant disturbances in thinking, emotional regulation, or 
behaviour  
• There are many different types of mental disorders  
• Effective prevention and treatment options exist  
• Most people do not have access to effective care  
A mental disorder is characterized by a clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition, 
emotional regulation, or behaviour.   It is usually associated with distress or impairment in important 
areas of functioning. There are many different t ypes of mental disorders.   Mental disorders may also 
be referred to as mental health conditions. The latter is a broader term covering mental disorders, 
psychosocial disabilities and (other) mental states associated with significant distress, impairment in  
functioning, or risk of self -harm.   This fact sheet focuses on mental disorders as described by the 
International Classification of Diseases 11th Revision (ICD -11). 
In 2019, 1 in every 8 people, or 970 million people around the world were living with a mental 
disorder, with anxiety and depressive disorders the most common (1). In 2020, the number of people 
living with anxiety and depressive disorders rose significantl y because of the COVID -19 
pandemic.   Initial estimates show a 26% and 28% increase respectively for anxiety and major 
depressive disorders in just one year (2). While effective prevention and treatment options exist, 
most people with mental disorders do no t have access to effective care. Many people also 
experience stigma, discrimination and violations of human rights.   
Anxiety Disorders  
In 2019, 301 million people were living with an anxiety disorder including 58 million children and 
adolescents (1).   Anxiety disorders are characterised by excessive fear and worry and related 
behavioural disturbances. Symptoms are severe enough to result in significant distress or significant 
impairment in functioning. There are several different kinds of anxiety disorders, such as: generalised 
anxiety disorder (characterised by excessive worry), panic disorder (characterised by panic attacks), 
social anxi ety disorder (characterised by excessive fear and worry in social situations), separation 
anxiety disorder (characterised by excessive fear or anxiety about separation from those individuals 
to whom the person has a deep emotional bond), and others. Effecti ve psychological treatment 
exists, and depending on the age and severity, medication may also be considered.  
Depression  
In 2019, 280 million people were living with depression, including 23 million children and 
adolescents (1). Depression is different from usual mood fluctuations and short -lived emotional 
responses to challenges in everyday life.   During a depressive episod e, the person experiences 
depressed mood (feeling sad, irritable, empty) or a loss of pleasure or interest in activities, for most 
of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks. Several other symptoms are also present, which may include poor concentration, feelings of excessive guilt or low self -worth, hopelessness about the 
future, thoughts about dying or suicide, disrupted sleep, changes in appetite or weight, and feeling 
especially tired or low in energy.  People with depres sion are at an increased risk of suicide. Yet, 
effective psychological treatment exists, and depending on the age and severity, medication may also 
be considered.   
Bipolar Disorder  
In 2019, 40 million people experienced bipolar disorder (1).   People with bipolar disorder experience 
alternating depressive episodes with periods of manic symptoms.   During a depressive episode, the 
person experiences depressed mood (feeling sad, irritabl e, empty) or a loss of pleasure or interest in 
activities, for most of the day, nearly every day.   Manic symptoms may include euphoria or irritability, 
increased activity or energy, and other symptoms such as increased talkativeness, racing thoughts, 
incre ased self -esteem, decreased need for sleep, distractibility, and impulsive reckless 
behaviour.   People with bipolar disorder are at an increased risk of suicide. Yet effective treatment 
options exist including psychoeducation, reduction of stress and stren gthening of social functioning, 
and medication.  
Post -Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)  
The prevalence of PTSD and other mental disorders is high in conflict -affected settings (3). PTSD may 
develop following exposure to an extremely threatening or horrific event or series of events. It is 
characterised by all of the following: 1) re -experienc ing the traumatic event or events in the present 
(intrusive memories, flashbacks, or nightmares); 2) avoidance of thoughts and memories of the 
event(s), or avoidance of activities, situations, or people reminiscent of the event(s); and 3) 
persistent percep tions of heightened current threat. These symptoms persist for at least several 
weeks and cause significant impairment in functioning. Effective psychological treatment exists.   
Schizophrenia  
Schizophrenia affects approximately 24 million people or 1 in 300 people worldwide (1).  People with 
schizophrenia have a life expectancy 10 -20 years below that of the general population 
(4).   Schizophrenia is characterised by significant impairments in pe rception and changes in 
behaviour.   Symptoms may include persistent delusions, hallucinations, disorganised thinking, highly 
disorganised behaviour, or extreme agitation.   People with schizophrenia may experience persistent 
difficulties with their cognitiv e functioning.    Yet, a range of effective treatment options exist, 
including medication, psychoeducation, family interventions, and psychosocial rehabilitation.   
Eating Disorders  
In 2019, 14 million people experienced eating disorders including almost 3 million children and 
adolescents (1). Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, involve abnormal 
eating and preoccupation with food as well as prominent body w eight and shape concerns. The 
symptoms or behaviours result in significant risk or damage to health, significant distress, or 
significant impairment of functioning. Anorexia nervosa often has its onset during adolescence or 
early adulthood and is associate d with premature death due to medical complications or 
suicide.   Individuals with bulimia nervosa are at a significantly increased risk for substance use, 
suicidality, and health complications. Effective treatment options exist, including family -based 
treatment and cognitive -based therapy.  
Disruptive behaviour and dissocial disorders  40 million people, including children and adolescents, were living with conduct -dissocial disorder in 
2019 (1). This disorder, also known as conduct disorder, is one of two disruptive behaviour and 
dissocial disorders, the other is oppositional defiant dis order.   Disruptive behaviour and dissocial 
disorders are characterised by persistent behaviour problems such as persistently defiant or 
disobedient to behaviours that persistently violate the basic rights of others or major age -
appropriate societal norms, rules, or laws. Onset of disruptive and dissocial disorders, is commonly, 
though not always, during childhood. Effective psychological treatments exist, often involving 
parents, caregivers, and teachers, cognitive problem -solving or social skills training.  
Neurodevelopmental disorders  
Neurodevelopmental disorders are behavioural and cognitive disorders, that ? arise during the 
developmental period, and involve significant difficulties in the acquisition and execution of specific 
intellectual, motor, language, or social functions.  
Neurodevelopmental disorders include disorders of intellectual development, autism spectrum 
disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) amongst others. ADHD is characterised 
by a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity -impu lsivity that has a direct negative 
impact on academic, occupational, or social functioning.   Disorders of intellectual development are 
characterised by significant limitations in intellectual functioning and adaptive behaviour, which 
refers to difficulties  with everyday conceptual , social,  and practical  skills that are performed in daily 
life. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) constitutes a diverse group of conditions characterised by some 
degree of difficulty with social communication and reciprocal social interaction, as well as persistent 
restricted, repe titive, and inflexible patterns of behaviour, interests, or activities.  
Effective treatment options exist including psychosocial interventions, behavioural interventions, 
occupational and speech therapy. For certain diagnoses and age groups, medication may also be 
considered.  
Who is at risk from developing a mental disorder?  
At any one time, a diverse set of individual, family, community, and structural factors may combine to 
protect or undermine mental health. Although most people are resilient, people who are exposed to 
adverse circumstances – including poverty, violence, di sability, and inequality – are at higher risk. 
Protective and risk factors include individual psychological and biological factors, such as emotional 
skills as well as genetics.  Many of the risk and protective factors are influenced through changes in 
brain structure and/or function.  
Health systems and social support  
Health systems have not yet adequately responded to the needs of people with mental disorders and 
are significantly under resourced.  The gap between the need for treatment and its provision is wide 
all over the world; and is often poor in quality when del ivered. For example, only 29% of people with 
psychosis (5) and only one third of people with depression receive formal mental health care (6).   
People with mental disorders also require social support, including support in developing and 
maintaining personal, family, and social relationships.   People with mental disorders may also need 
support for educational programmes, employment, housing, and p articipation in other meaningful 
activities.   
WHO response  
